Tuning a Notch Type DuplexerHow do I tune this notch duplexer?
A Band Reject duplexer is commonly referred to as a notch duplexer.  The 
transmitter side of the duplexer is tuned to the receiver frequency, which it 
notches out.  The receiver port is tuned to the transmitter frequency, which it 
notches out. 
Notch only duplexers are readily available in the used / surplus market and eBay 
is also a good source.  These were commonly used in mobile repeater applications 
and were made by Celwave, Phelps Dodge, and others. 
  
When the duplexer has the same number of cavities on either side of the antenna 
connector, the transmitter and receiver ports are likely identical and can be 
used in reverse if the configuration of the duplexer from the factory was 
inverted, or your repeater is upside-down from the common commercial high-in 
low-out configuration.  If the tag on the duplexer is still intact, use the 
original configuration as a guide for determining which way is best for your 
situation.  These duplexers are somewhat asymmetrical.  If the duplexer has a 
label that has the previous frequencies on it (like TX 453.500 RX 458.500), you 
should maintain the same low-port/high-port relationship.  That might mean that 
you end up transmitting in to the port previously labeled "REC" and receiving on 
the port previously labeled "TRANS" if your offset is the opposite of what the 
original factory- labeled setup was.  What I am trying to make sure you don't do 
is re-tune the factory tuned higher notch to the low side and vice versa.  This 
will cause the duplexer to have excessive insertion loss and not provide stated 
isolation.  Keep the notch's on the same side as original.  If the duplexer is 
built with a different number of cavities on either side of the antenna 
connection, you likely cannot invert the receive and transmit connections from 
their factory locations.  Why?  It is usually more important to provide more 
transmitter sideband noise suppression than to provide more carrier suppression. 

The duplexer provides isolation by notching transmitter power from going to the 
receiver and by notching transmitter noise from going to the receiver.  This may 
sound confusing, but this is what it does.  With this in mind, let me give an 
example: 
Repeater TX = 444.000 and RX = 449.000 
The transmit side of the duplexer is tuned to notch the receiver, so.... in 
other words, the transmit side of the duplexer is tuned to the receiver 
frequency. 
In this example the transmit side of the duplexer is tuned to 449.000 and the 
receiver side is tuned to 444.000.  Remember you are tuning the duplexer to 
eliminate power or signal, not pass them. 
I commonly hook my signal generator to the antenna port and send one of the 
frequencies into the duplexer.  I choose which side is best for the receiver and 
connect a hand-held to that port tuned to the repeater receiver frequency.  I 
tune the duplexer receive sections back and forth to eliminate (notch) out the 
reading on the hand-helds S-Meter.  You'll need to keep increasing the output of 
the generator as you provide more notch depth.  Keep going till there is no 
further ability to notch the signal out. 
Now, tune the generator and handheld to the transmitter frequency.  Move the 
hand-helds connection to the other port and tune this side of the duplexer to 
notch out this frequency. 
After both have been done, do it again as there is some interaction between 
sides. 
The last thing is to verify proper insertion loss of the intended pass 
frequency.  Connect the hand-held to the antenna port, and the generator to the 
receiver port.  Tune the hand-held and generator for the receiver frequency.  
There should be little loss in the duplexer.  You can connect the hand-held to 
the generator directly and tune the output of the generator for say a half scale 
S-Meter reading.  Now replace the duplexer in line as above and there should be 
little difference in the S-Meter reading. 
Do the same for the other side and verify results. 
Properly tuned 4 section duplexers will only exhibit about 1 dB of loss on the 
intended frequency and will provide about 60 dB of notch depth.  6 cavity 
duplexers will have about 1.2 to 1.4 dB of insertion loss and provide 75 dB or 
more rejection. 
More information on the Celwave or Phelps Dodge mobile duplexer can be found 
here: 
http://www.rfsworld.com/ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Copyright August 16 2000, Kevin K. Custer  W3KKC 
All Rights Reserved. 
